---
layout: post
title: "Massive Upheaval"
---

# Massive Upheavals for Fun and Profit

One of the fun parts of working on side projects is the ability to pivot just because it's the right, or fun thing to do.


## Project Overview

There's finally a pretty clear picture of most of the architecture, so I'm gonna present as much of it as I have patience for ... there's a lot here now.

There are two sides to the main program: authoring and simulating.

### Molecules and Foods

There are 4 `molecules` present in the simulated universe. Three occur in nature and produce edible substances from sunlight: Alpha, Beta, Gamma. The fourth is Biomass, and represents the remains of a deceased agent. We also cheat and allow injecting "extra" biomass into the world, more on why later.

A `Food` is an edible natural resource cache found in the world. The method by which these caches are created is covered later. It's simplest to think of a single resource cache as a bush, where multiple critters could munch on it at the same time, in theory.

A food's recipe is the 3-way balance (in 10% increments) between the 3 molecules, as defined by the user in the UI. The recipe gives the food a particular molecular "shape" - and that same concept is available in the digestive process of agents, as well as their sense of smell. This gives a ton of flexibility to create resource pressures related to geographic areas, to give agents the opportunity to learn which foods benefit them the most, etc.

### Biomes

A biome is an area that you paint on a region map. A biome imprints its definition on the cells that it covers. It's way more complicated than that due to the upscaling process described later, but a biome essentially defines what an area is like ... natural resource availability, mobility costs, sunlight amounts, etc. Where ever you don't define a biome, the default biome Ground is used, which you can also define properties for.

Biome properties: 
  - Sunlight Amount
  - Mobility Cost
  - Resource Density
  - Resource GrowthRate
  - list of foods allowed to grow here

### Regions

A `region` is a 32x32 grid of cells. Every cell can be painted with any biome. The edges of a region can be significant...

### Worlds

A `world` is a stitched-together arrangement of 1, 2 or 4 regions to produce one complete environment. The shape of the world is either a single region, 2 regions side by side or over/under (so a single shared, traversable border), or 4 in a square, for 4 shared region borders.

### Upscaling

32x32 would be a tiny simulation, even at 4 regions.

The `world` definition is sent through a process called Upscaling, where authored data is multiplied by 8, randomized, and "spread out" to produce a ton of variation from a modest, simple to manage, "low-res" authoring process. E.g. if a biome covers an area that ends up being 64x64 cells, then the resources are spread around that area according to the Resource Density setting of the biome, plus lots of other factors, producing a more natural, randomized environment.


### Self-Managing Environment

The entire environment runs on its own, breathing with the raising and setting of the sun. The day contains 120 ticks. The sun follows a curve up and back down until tick 80, at which point it's ... y'know ... night, due to no sun. At night, natural resources go *poof* very quickly, leaving a landscape barren of natural resources by about half way into the night.

Biomass caches are the opposite - in sunlight they dry up almost immediately, but at night, they barely degrade at all. There's only one problem - agents cannot smell Biomass, and therefore cannot eat it (eew, gross) to find out how much more energy dense it is ...


### Agents

The nameless, faceless critters made of data that populate the environment. This is where things get fun in this kind of simulation ...

You're never 0% hungry at 11:59am, and then suddenly 100% hungry at 12:00pm, thus deciding it's time to eat. Hunger is a pressure, and it lives in the same world as your job, taking your car to the shop, etc. 

Agents are the same way with the things they're capable of doing, which today is:
  - Move
  - Eat (forage)
  - Rest (shelter)
  - Reproduce (spit out a babeh)

It's a simple life, but they don't know any better.

Each of these actions has an evaluation stage inside the agent's tiny little brain, and its brain "votes" on each of the things it *could* do, and then its thinkerbox sets out all the votes, considers everything, and then selects an action. This happens every tick.


### Simulating

A huge positioning clarification and large amount of work has gone into structuring the app in a way that makes sense when you combine the following:

  - I still have learning and mutation ahead which are going to require time in the sim. Some forms of learning never amount to anything without enough repeated exposures to the learned situation.
  - The current sim event record is about 400 bytes. The sim is wired to be able to output a LOT of diagnostic events.
  - stepping is a requirement for feature development. Long, full-speed runs are important for interesting things to happen

The default operation of the sim is to write events to a memory mapped file through a listener wired up to the primary diagnostic event hub. Every generated event is sent to the file, raw and unfiltered. The simulator page in the app displays a clock, a controller with Record and Step commands, as well as a list of playlist segments that define slices of time within the sim, if they should be recorded, and when they should stop (time, or events). This allows *not* recording huge slices of time that run at full speed, and then turning on the eventlog at a certain time or event. Using a stable RandSeed system allows for complete repeatability, and forensic review of event logs can reveal interesting events that can then be investigated (i.e. increased logging) and the session can be run again.

### Event Log Viewing and Analysis

I could spend forever trying to do pretty charts, or I could leverage the entire ecosystem that exists on the interwebs that already does what I'd want, and much better than I ever could.

So, the Rule of Cool, combined with just being sane enough not to try to write graphics-heavy visualizers, means I get to write a WebBroker REST server that can serve up info about an eventlog collection, but also provide low-level data access for component support. I get to dip my foot into Tailwind, and HTMLX. 

I'm almost dead over the fact that Delphi CE doesn't have WebStencils. When I realized CE was a point-release away I almost curled up and made like dead. *le frickin sigh* I'm gutted over this and literally almost changed my mind over it.

$1500.

For the lowest possible licensed edition of an IDE.

In 2026.

mkay.










