---
layout: post
title: "Blog Flop"
---

# I Suck At Blogging

huh, that was surprisingly easy. Now I can let myself off the hook!


## Learning Appears

We're finally getting to some of the juicy stuff, as today I wired up weight updating for `acMove` only, but it's a start, and a pattern to copy.

Learning has been a big black box with tons of notes in markdown files everywhere, but I've finally narrowed it down to a system of 96 weights (for now), with a fairly understandable flow. There's a balance between richness of learning contexts versus the difficulty of encountering the same context enough for the decision weighting to converge and become significant. This feels like the right depth to start with given the environment size, agent mobility, etc.

The basic workflow change is the addition of the `Reflect()` method on the brain, to allow for evaluating the outcome of the requested/resolved action, and updating the decision weights for that context.

Once I get learning attached to all the actions, it'll be time to start thinking about heritance and mutations.

## Recapping Some (Maybe) New Additions

- `acShelter` now costs to enter. I previously had a turtle shell metaphor for a mental model, but this is more like burrowing, and gives a better pressure hook than the free state change it was before.

- The event log file changes are mostly all in place. There will be an option to disable the scratch event log at some point, for truly transient tests.

- I added a `wander` evaluator that votes on `acMove` when there's no food smell detected. Without this, an agent just sits there and dies. Now they get a free hint direction of a random resource cache that is outside a certain distance, or a random corner of the environment if there's nothing anywhere.

- Sessions were completely overhauled. We now have two equal-ish session types, normal and debug. There are two library types - the environment library (editable types for the UI) and the debug library (hand-written scenarios for testing). There is a session composer interface that allows both session types to be treated equally by the runtime.

- Logging continues to be a topic. I've decided on a "fields" type approach, it just needs to be fleshed out. No more virtual tree, I'm using the `TControlList` now.

