---
layout: post
title: "Delta"
---

# Behavior Goals

Having design goals for agent behavior, in a system based on continuous pressures vs scripted behavior, can be a challenge. Since we're not scripting any behaviors they have to emerge "naturally" based on pressures, affordances, opportunities.

I've wanted to provide a pathway for an agent to flip to a more nocturnal lifestyle from the beginning. Biomass was loosely designed to handle both the carrion issue, and provide nocturnal pressures. In the end, this is messy and not a good design. Agent expiration is not a good scale for a food source. On top of that - biomass could not be authored in any meaningful way, so using it for efficient pressures was difficult.


# Enter Delta

Maybe refactoring is addictive ...

Anyway, bye-bye Biomass, hello Delta. Delta is much more similar to the other molecules that Biomass ever was. It's also a naturally occurring resource, but it only grows in moonlight, and not in sunlight. You can't author foods containing Delta, but a biome has a property for DeltaDensity.

The simulator handles creating Delta caches at night, and they grow/decay like other molecules, just tied to lunar flux instead of solar flux.

For now, agents will poof into thin air when they expire. I still have notification hooks to do something else, if we ever decide to. Biomass is really only useful if you also include danger, predation, and survival techniques, which is a bit of a different direction than I want for this project. I'd rather spend 4 hours working on learning than predation. Learning is where we're going to get emergent behaviors.


# Newborn Follow

We're going to create a set of pressures for both the parent and the child, to motivate the child to follow their parent for some amount of time at the beginning of life. The parent's food evaluations will be boosted inversely to ticks since reproduction, and the child's food sensing will be dampened inversely relative to age. If a child's parent is visible, their move evaluations will score heaving towards the parent when there's no sign of food, for the first few days - again, inversely relative to age. So if an agent's age is low, food is scarce, and parent is visible, that'll score heaving for move towards parent. All these pressures disappear naturally with the passage of time.


